[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I
[Amit Varma]: take a shot at answering all these questions and many more.
[Amit Varma]: I aim to go beyond the scene and show you the unseen effects of public policy and private
[Amit Varma]: action.
[Amit Varma]: I speak to experts on economics, political philosophy, cognitive neuroscience and constitutional
[Amit Varma]: law so that their insights can blow not only my mind but also yours.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen releases every Monday.
[Amit Varma]: So do check out the archives and follow the show at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: You can also subscribe to The Scene and the Unseen on whatever podcast app you happen
[Amit Varma]: to prefer.
[Amit Varma]: And now let's move on to the show.
[Amit Varma]: I was passing by a football stadium the other day and I saw that there was a giant party
[Amit Varma]: going on inside.
[Amit Varma]: There was loud music and the aroma of delicious food.
[Amit Varma]: I decided to gatecrash the party.
[Amit Varma]: I sneaked in and I found that there were hundreds of people, mostly pot-bellied men, dancing
[Amit Varma]: wildly, shooting guns in the air, hugging each other and shouting, Modi ji zindabad,
[Amit Varma]: Modi ji zindabad.
[Amit Varma]: There was a giant picture of Narendra Modi on one wall with garlands around it.
[Amit Varma]: The sound system blared out loud bhajans with a disco beat.
[Amit Varma]: I stopped one gentleman who had an open bottle of Old Monk in his hand and asked him why
[Amit Varma]: he was celebrating.
[Amit Varma]: He told me, because achche din are here, Modi ji has brought us achche din.
[Amit Varma]: And at this, the crowd started chanting, achche din, achche din, achche din.
[Amit Varma]: Wait a minute, I asked the guy, you surely don't believe in that achche din nonsense,
[Amit Varma]: do you?
[Amit Varma]: We know now that those were empty promises.
[Amit Varma]: The man turned to me with a beat-fixed smile.
[Amit Varma]: They weren't empty promises for us, he said.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, our dins could not be any more achche.
[Amit Varma]: You see, we are chartered accountants.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: In this episode, I'm going to be talking about the GST, the goods and services tax.
[Amit Varma]: Of the Modi government's big economic measures, most people now agree that demonetization
[Amit Varma]: was a huge failure, if not an outright humanitarian disaster.
[Amit Varma]: I call it the largest assault on property rights in the history of humanity.
[Amit Varma]: But on GST, opinion is mixed.
[Amit Varma]: People like the idea of a good and simple tax, as it is sometimes called.
[Amit Varma]: And I must say that the idea behind the tax appeals to me as well.
[Amit Varma]: But is it really a good and simple tax?
[Amit Varma]: Most critics say that the implementation of GST was badly flawed, and argue only about
[Amit Varma]: the extent of that.
[Amit Varma]: Well, to discuss the GST with me, I've invited my good friend Shruti Rajagopalan, who teaches
[Amit Varma]: economics at Purchase College in the State University of New York.
[Amit Varma]: A quick disclaimer, my conversation with her was recorded on Skype, so I apologize in advance
[Amit Varma]: if the sound quality drops in parts.
[Amit Varma]: But before we go there, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If this happens to be the only podcast you listen to, well, you need to listen to some
[Amit Varma]: more.
[Amit Varma]: Check out the ones from IVM Podcast, who co-produced the show with me.
[Amit Varma]: Go to ivmpodcast.com or download the IVM app, and you'll find a host of great Indian podcasts
[Amit Varma]: that cover every subject you could think of.
[Amit Varma]: From the magazine I edit, Pragati, at thinkpragati.com, there is the Pragati podcast, hosted by Hamsini
[Amit Varma]: Hariharan and Pawan Srinath, there is a brilliant Hindi podcast, Hulia Bazi, hosted by Pranay
[Amit Varma]: Koteswamy and Sourabh Chandra.
[Amit Varma]: And apart from these policy podcasts, IVM has shows that cover music, films, finance,
[Amit Varma]: sports, sci-fi, tech, and the LGBT community, all under one roof, or rather, all in one
[Amit Varma]: app.
[Amit Varma]: So download the IVM Podcast app today.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Hi, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, I've started this new tradition on my shows of just chatting with my guests and
[Amit Varma]: asking them a few personal questions, so the listeners can get to know them a little better.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, one presumes that listeners knows them as well as I may, and we go straight
[Amit Varma]: on to the dry technical stuff.
[Amit Varma]: So you're an economist and a lawyer.
[Guest]: How did you land up here?
[Guest]: Because I have made many, many, many mistakes in my life.
[Guest]: No, I studied economics at the undergrad level at Delhi University, which was great fun.
[Guest]: I always thought I would end up being a lawyer and ended up going to Delhi University to
[Guest]: the Faculty of Law to get a law degree.
[Guest]: And about a semester or a semester and a half into it, I really didn't enjoy the course
[Guest]: at all.
[Guest]: I loved studying the law, but I was quite certain I won't enjoy the practice.
[Guest]: And as I did more legal research, I figured that at the core of it, I'm, I'm an economist.
[Guest]: So I don't think in normative terms, I really think in positive terms as an analytical framework.
[Guest]: So even though I loved studying law, law doesn't come with its own analytical framework, right?
[Amit Varma]: Can you explain that in simple language, not thinking in normative terms and thinking in
[Guest]: analytical terms?
[Guest]: So you can basically make arguments on either side when you have a legal case.
[Guest]: And this is not to say that, you know, every argument is equally valid, right?
[Guest]: So it depends on what kind of structure you have, what is the style of argumentation?
[Guest]: What is the standard in each particular legal system?
[Guest]: But at the end of the day, you don't get an answer like, you know, if you ask me, Shruti,
[Guest]: I'm thinking of taking a walk out of the window on the third floor, what do you think is going
[Guest]: to happen?
[Guest]: We all know what's going to happen, you're going to fall down, right?
[Guest]: Similarly, economics gives you a very, very clean analytical framework, right?
[Guest]: This is the law of opportunity cost, the law of scarcity, right?
[Guest]: All positive analysis is strongly rooted in these ideas.
[Guest]: And if you ask like the window question, what happens when the price of onions goes up?
[Guest]: A simple answer is the quantity demanded of onions goes down.
[Guest]: So economics gives you a very clean, positive framework.
[Guest]: Now, you may not like the answer that the quantity demanded of the onions went down,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: You may not like the outcome.
[Guest]: But it gives you a very clean way to think about the world, right?
[Guest]: How does how do people in the world behave when they confront scarcity?
[Guest]: And when they have certain incentives provided by the institutional structure?
[Guest]: So I found this very missing in law.
[Guest]: In law, people make legal decisions and create legal policy as if they were not to be implemented
[Guest]: by humans, right?
[Guest]: As if these these policies are going to be implemented by an omniscient, benevolent,
[Guest]: all knowing, just, fair, mythical creature.
[Guest]: So that part of the law really bothered me.
[Guest]: And so I decided that the correct field for me is really law and economics, which allows
[Guest]: me to look at legal structures, which I'm fascinated by.
[Guest]: But the analytical framework comes from economics, all the assumptions that you make about the
[Guest]: world come from the discipline of economics, so simple assumptions, like, we analyze people
[Guest]: at the individual level, not at the organizational or the structural level, right?
[Guest]: That individuals are self interested, and they respond to incentives, and that we live
[Guest]: in a world of scarcity.
[Guest]: So if you start with these basic assumptions, you would be surprised how quickly you can
[Guest]: get insight into how complex systems work, which is the entire discipline of law and
[Guest]: economics.
[Guest]: So that really fascinated me.
[Guest]: Then I decided, you know, I will go into law and economics.
[Guest]: And I eventually ended up getting my PhD in economics.
[Guest]: I was very interested in some sub fields.
[Guest]: One of them is constitutional economics.
[Guest]: And the other is public choice.
[Guest]: So I went to George Mason University, where, at the time, James Buchanan, Gordon Tullock,
[Guest]: you know, sort of the, the really, the people who were there at the foundation of these
[Guest]: disciplines were teaching there, and their students and their tradition.
[Guest]: So I went to George Mason to study this stuff, and eventually, just just fell in love with
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: And can you sort of tell our listeners a little bit more about what is constitutional economics?
[Amit Varma]: And what is it like, what do you study when you do that?
[Amit Varma]: And what is public choice theory?
[Guest]: So constitutional economics is just what I was telling about law and economics, but specifically
[Guest]: for constitutional rules, there are two parts to it.
[Guest]: One is sort of like, think of it as a sort of thought experiment.
[Guest]: If five people got together, and their end goal was x, what kind of rules are they likely
[Guest]: to design to get x?
[Guest]: Okay, so this could be you play poker, it could be at the level of poker or parlor games,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Or it could be at the level of what should be the individual rights framework in a system.
[Guest]: So when a good example of constitutional economics is something like analyzing the difference
[Guest]: between presidential and parliamentary systems, right, this is at the constitutional level.
[Guest]: If you were framing a constitution today, how would you frame it?
[Guest]: Would you go for a presidential system?
[Guest]: Or would you go for a parliamentary system, and that depends on what the individual framers
[Guest]: have in mind as their end goals, right?
[Guest]: So some people believe that power is very much concentrated in the executive, in a presidential
[Guest]: system.
[Guest]: So people who are worried about that kind of concentration of power or interest group
[Guest]: capture might prefer a parliamentary system, right?
[Guest]: Some people believe in a parliamentary system, there's too much churn, there's too much law
[Guest]: ruling, because there's no, doesn't produce like a clear victor, right?
[Guest]: So people who are worried about those concerns prefer a presidential system.
[Guest]: So it really depends on who are the people coming together to form the rules, and what
[Guest]: are their end goals with respect to those rules.
[Guest]: So that's one.
[Guest]: The other part of it is what are the consequences of these rules, right?
[Guest]: And we've done a couple of episodes on this.
[Guest]: What are the consequences of, for instance, the eminent domain provision or the lack of
[Guest]: it in the current Indian constitution, right?
[Guest]: So when you have weak constitutional rules, how do individuals respond to that system?
[Guest]: And what are the good or bad or terrible consequences that take place?
[Guest]: We did something similar on constitutionalizing caste, where we talked about what are the
[Guest]: incentives for people of all different castes to hold on to their caste identity or to let
[Guest]: it go in a market system vis-a-vis a reservation system.
[Guest]: So these are some basic things.
[Guest]: I mean, this is these are some basic examples of, you know, work that can be done in constitutional
[Amit Varma]: economics.
[Guest]: And what about public choice?
[Guest]: Public choice is much broader than this.
[Guest]: It is basically the analysis of political decision making.
[Guest]: So it's the economic analysis or the positive analysis of political decision making.
[Guest]: So we go back to the assumption that we were talking about a moment ago, which is we assume,
[Guest]: you know, about 50 years ago or 70 years ago in political theory, people would say the
[Guest]: executive branch believes this, the judicial branch believes this, right?
[Guest]: So it's done very much as if the judicial branch is like this, you know, vague structural
[Guest]: thing, which is a different entity, not exactly made up of individuals.
[Guest]: So the first thing public choice did is break it down to the individual decision making
[Guest]: unit.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So break it down to what are the incentives of a Supreme Court judge within the judicial
[Guest]: system, of a high court judge, of a judicial clerk, right?
[Guest]: So at each level, you can break it down to what are the incentives of the actors acting
[Guest]: within the judiciary.
[Guest]: The second part of it was in terms of political decision making, the attention shifted from
[Guest]: intentions to incentives.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So while we like to assume that everyone in office is very well meaning, what are actually
[Guest]: the incentives that these individuals confront in their daily work?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So you have written a fair bit about this, about how bureaucrats are really interested
[Guest]: in sort of protecting their turf and increasing their budgets and increasing their authority
[Guest]: within a system.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So Gordon Tullock's bureaucracy was a foundational work in this realm.
[Guest]: So these are sort of some of the things in public choice.
[Guest]: The other aspect of public choice is voting theory.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So earlier, the idea was that people are self-interested when they go to buy apples or oranges.
[Guest]: But when they go to the voting booths, they suddenly become these very benevolent public
[Guest]: spirited creatures.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And public choice introduced the idea that that's not true.
[Guest]: You are the exact same individual who responds to incentives in the same way, whether you're
[Guest]: buying apples or whether you're going to vote in a voting booth.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So that brings up all sorts of issues, which is, are the incentives in the political decision
[Guest]: making framework as robust as the incentives within market decision making or within a
[Guest]: firm or within a family?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: How do you think about voting identity within a collective?
[Guest]: How do you think about voting in a primary system versus the final system?
[Guest]: So just lots of voting theory questions were answered by public choice.
[Guest]: In India, the most relevant would be we have a system called the first past the post.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So whoever crosses the finish line first gets the parliamentary seat or gets the any legislative
[Guest]: seat.
[Guest]: And that number need not be 51 percent.
[Guest]: So imagine a highly fractionalized constituency where you have about seven or eight main contenders.
[Guest]: We have a number of constituencies where the victor has received only about 25 percent
[Guest]: of the vote, sometimes 10 percent of the vote.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And this is 10 percent of the 46 percent who showed up to vote of the adult population,
[Guest]: which is allowed to vote.
[Guest]: So really a fraction of the people can help someone win a parliamentary seat.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So in the case of, you know, the UPA versus the NDA outcome of the last election, if you
[Guest]: notice their vote shares aren't that far apart.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: But, you know, under the leadership of Rahul Gandhi, they barely got about 44 seats and
[Guest]: NDA managed to cross the finish line.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it's interesting that in the 2014 national elections, BJP got pretty much the
[Amit Varma]: same vote share that they did in the subsequent Delhi election, where they only got 8 on 9
[Guest]: seats.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, how, how much of a difference those dynamics make?
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And much of this is about first past the post system.
[Guest]: It is about how the constituency lines are drawn, right, how population is changing,
[Guest]: how identities are changing, because we vote very much along the lines of religious linguistic
[Guest]: caste identities in India.
[Guest]: So there is like just a tremendously rich literature in public choice talking about
[Guest]: these questions, you know, which which people can write about with respect to India also.
[Amit Varma]: And not enough people in India know about it or write about it.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something I keep saying that, you know, public choice theory is not like
[Amit Varma]: some arcane branch of economics, but it's something that should be essential knowledge
[Amit Varma]: for every Indian.
[Amit Varma]: Because at its core, it's, you know, economics at its core is a study of human behavior.
[Amit Varma]: And what public choice theory teaches you is that government is not some mythical benevolent
[Amit Varma]: beast that we have built up, which, you know, acts in a particular way, but it's composed
[Amit Varma]: of individuals at various different levels who have various different kinds of incentives
[Amit Varma]: available to them.
[Amit Varma]: And they act according to those incentives, which is why, as I like to say, not every
[Amit Varma]: politician is a bad person.
[Amit Varma]: But it is safe to assume that every politician is corrupt, because power corrupts.
[Amit Varma]: But that's that's a subject for another episode entirely.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, we should do an episode on public choice sometime.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: But let's get to the subject at hand, which is GST.
[Amit Varma]: Now I've done two episodes in GST before this one with Devangshu Dutta, one with my frequent
[Amit Varma]: guest and our mutual friend Vivek Kaul.
[Amit Varma]: With Devangshu I've done an episode before GST where he kind of spoke about how the concept
[Amit Varma]: of GST is great, but he is worried that the implementation will be flawed in exactly the
[Amit Varma]: ways that it turned out to be, you know, too many categories and too many exemptions.
[Amit Varma]: And instead of being a good and simple tax, it's just one mindlessly complex beast that
[Amit Varma]: might even make things worse.
[Amit Varma]: And Vivek pointed out concrete examples of some of this, for example, bringing up the
[Amit Varma]: point of whether KitKat is a chocolate or a biscuit.
[Amit Varma]: And when you have so many categories and exemptions, you just raise the cost of doing business
[Amit Varma]: instead of bringing it down.
[Amit Varma]: You might reduce friction in some areas, such as you know, different interstate taxes when
[Amit Varma]: a good crosses borders or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But you actually increase the complexities in some other ways.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason I asked you to come on the show and talk about GST is that you did this
[Amit Varma]: excellent column from Mint called Simple Rules for a Complex World, which borrows this title
[Amit Varma]: from a book by Richard Epstein, which you refer to.
[Amit Varma]: And I wanted you to elaborate on that a little bit, because that really lays bare very well
[Amit Varma]: what some of the problems with our current GST are.
[Guest]: OK, so I'll start with the idea of the title and then expand on to GST.
[Guest]: So Richard Epstein's book, and he gets his intuition originally from Frederick Hayek,
[Guest]: is that as the level of complexity increases in society and the economy, what we actually
[Guest]: need are simpler rules to help us navigate through the very complex choices.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So there are two ways people think about something.
[Guest]: They think as the level of complexity increases, they should have more rules, more regulations,
[Guest]: more sub regulations that adapt to that very specific situation and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And Richard Epstein, following Hayek, said not really, actually, because the level of
[Guest]: complexity in the economy is so high, it is almost impossible to make rules for that level
[Guest]: of complexity.
[Guest]: So what we end up doing is somewhat, you know, some mid-level of complexity of regulation,
[Guest]: which really hampers individual behavior, sets up poor incentives, makes it very difficult
[Guest]: to comply with that regulatory framework.
[Guest]: So what we need is very, very simple, bright-lined rules, which are easy to understand, easy
[Guest]: to navigate, easy to resolve disputes over, so that people can actually go about spending
[Guest]: their time navigating the wonderful complex economy and the world we live in.
[Guest]: So that's the idea of the book.
[Guest]: Now coming to GST, I really enjoyed the episodes by Devanshu and Vivek.
[Guest]: And I think my intuition about how GST has played out is very much in line with theirs.
[Guest]: So just to give our readers some background, GST was supposed to be, I mean, when it was
[Guest]: originally announced, they said, you know, one country, one tax, right?
[Guest]: That was the idea.
[Guest]: And the reason that was the idea was India is a federal system.
[Guest]: Every state and union territory had its own set of state taxes across different kinds
[Guest]: of goods and services.
[Guest]: And one major problem in India was when you had interstate trade, that is, you know, if
[Guest]: you wanted to sell something that was produced in Maharashtra and take it to Gujarat and
[Guest]: sell it there, you would get stopped at all these different checkposts, right?
[Guest]: And the purpose of these checkposts was to pay for the differential in taxes between
[Guest]: those two states.
[Guest]: So the idea was we unify the entire country under one tax system, and this way you have
[Guest]: far better seamless movement of goods and services.
[Guest]: So in that sense, this idea was just a fantastic idea, because, you know, you've written about
[Guest]: this and many people have done studies on, you know, it takes 45 days to cross from West
[Guest]: Bengal to Gujarat in a truck full of, you know, goods, which basically means all your
[Guest]: perishables are destroyed, which means farmers can never really get a single unified market
[Guest]: and actually get a better price for their goods.
[Amit Varma]: So there were a lot of problems for the regular guy, as in, if I may interject, there's a
[Amit Varma]: funny illustration of which this which comes to mind, which I think Mihir Sharma mentioned
[Amit Varma]: in his book, Restart, which is I forget the two cities involved.
[Amit Varma]: But if you want to shift goods from Madras to Bangalore, Chennai to Bangalore or Chennai
[Amit Varma]: to Hyderabad, I forget which exact cities there are two of those three, then it's cheaper
[Amit Varma]: to do it via Paris indirectly.
[Guest]: I'm not surprised.
[Guest]: And you know, and that's mind boggling, it is mind boggling, because basically what that
[Guest]: means is the checkpoint is placing a very high compliance cost, or the differential
[Guest]: rates are so high, you'd rather go abroad, pay customs duty and bring it in.
[Amit Varma]: Because one of the ports functions better.
[Amit Varma]: It's more a function of the delays plus the bribes.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So now, here there is, you know, I mean, Mihir makes very, very clever points.
[Guest]: And I don't know if he was hinting at this kind of regulatory arbitrage, which is, you
[Guest]: know, it's easier to bribe the customs official, they're cheaper than the guy at the interstate
[Guest]: checkpoint could be.
[Guest]: But you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: I mean, these are the sorts of problems.
[Guest]: And now, imagine this not for, you know, a move between two cities is a one time thing,
[Guest]: maybe you move once a decade, right?
[Guest]: We're talking about this happening for farmers, for small manufacturers on a daily level.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Imagine what a pain in the ass it is for people who are producing perishables for people who
[Guest]: are in dairy business, right?
[Guest]: If you can't get your goods across the border quickly, exactly.
[Guest]: So basically, India was a highly fragmented market.
[Guest]: So you know, kudos to the various governments in the past who tried to do this, and to this
[Guest]: government, which finally managed to execute it.
[Guest]: And in all fairness, the moment the GST was announced, you know, about 20 states or 22
[Guest]: states immediately lifted their border checkpoints, which was quite a remarkable result.
[Guest]: And I'm not saying corruption went away overnight, but I'm saying a system that had posed so
[Guest]: many problems, it could be solved with this one short tax system, which is quite fascinating.
[Guest]: Now having said that, the beauty of a GST system lies not just in its ability to unify
[Guest]: a territory under one umbrella, but also the way we would judge any other tax system, which
[Guest]: is, you know, is it simple?
[Guest]: Is it fair?
[Guest]: Is it efficient?
[Guest]: And on these margins, as you have discussed with Vivek, and as Didi's intuition was correct,
[Guest]: the GST fails quite badly.
[Guest]: So just to give you a sense of what is happening today with the GST, India has five different
[Guest]: GST rates, 0%, 5%, 12%, 18% and 28%, right?
[Guest]: And that is just big categories.
[Guest]: Now in addition to those rates, you can have a cess.
[Guest]: So we have a cess on entertainment.
[Guest]: We have a cess on luxury goods in some states.
[Guest]: We have a cess on petrol and diesel, in addition to this GST rate that is imposed on them.
[Guest]: In addition to that, there are some goods which are getting special rates, hint hint
[Guest]: Gujarat, right?
[Guest]: So gold is taxed at 3% GST, precious gemstones at 0.25% GST, right?
[Guest]: So you have a system where even though it might be an improvement over the previous
[Guest]: system from a jurisdiction point of view, that is, you know, you unified the country
[Guest]: under one tax system, what you've essentially done is you have lots and lots of rates and
[Guest]: classifications.
[Guest]: And as would be the case in any tax system, which is moving from one kind of tax system
[Guest]: to another, there is a lot of confusion over what is the GST rate to be levied on a particular
[Amit Varma]: good.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: In fact, before you move on, I'll just put these five rates into perspective.
[Amit Varma]: In your article itself, which by the way, for the benefit of the listeners will be linked
[Amit Varma]: at the bottom of the podcast, according to your article, you cite the World Bank India
[Amit Varma]: Development Update 2018.
[Amit Varma]: And you say that of the 115 countries with GST, 40 countries use a single rate, just
[Amit Varma]: one tax instead of these five, and 28 countries use two rates.
[Amit Varma]: And we are in the company of Italy, Ghana, Pakistan and Luxembourg as the only countries
[Amit Varma]: with four or more rates.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And you can imagine, I mean, other than Luxembourg, which can also be a regulatory nightmare,
[Guest]: I am guessing you don't have any positive things to say about the economy of the other
[Amit Varma]: three.
[Amit Varma]: Right, right.
[Guest]: So it's what we have chosen is in the spectrum of global GST frameworks, we have chosen the
[Guest]: most complex.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Now, the defenders of the government say we didn't exactly choose it.
[Guest]: This is how, you know, this is how the chips landed, because you had to make all these
[Guest]: deals and persuade all these different states to come under the umbrella.
[Guest]: And I can appreciate that there is a complex negotiation at play.
[Guest]: But having said that, the system we have today is just too complex.
[Guest]: So, you know, Vivek's example of the, is KitKat a biscuit or a chocolate?
[Guest]: It sounds cute and funny, but at the core of it, there's a really, really big problem,
[Guest]: which is, let's say we figure this out for KitKat.
[Guest]: What about the next good and the next good after that?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So I had a few examples in the article, which is things like, is Pepsi, Nimbu's pulp, right?
[Guest]: Or is it categorized, pulp is categorized at a different level, 12% from fruit juice.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: 12% from fruit juice, which is categorized at a different 28%, 28%.
[Guest]: And there's a big difference between 28% and 12% in terms of what a seller would want to
[Guest]: pay.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Now, there are additional everyday problems related to this, which is things like every
[Guest]: single person.
[Guest]: So the assumption is normally we raise this dispute, the GST council announces the rate
[Guest]: and then magically that information is just transmitted to everyone and everyone knows
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: But that's not true, right?
[Guest]: How many people are selling Pepsi in India, right?
[Guest]: What is their level of information about the tax system?
[Guest]: How many of them have the time to go to the GST council website every day, check the notifications?
[Guest]: So in the absence of this, what do they need to do?
[Guest]: They need to hire a lawyer or a chartered accountant who needs to go over every single
[Guest]: thing that they are selling or every single input that they are buying and help them work
[Guest]: through this maze.
[Guest]: That has become incredibly complex.
[Amit Varma]: And you illustrated the complexity with one superb sentence in your piece, which I remember
[Amit Varma]: quoting on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: I was so struck by it.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, one year into the GST regime, the HSN code book for GST classification contains
[Amit Varma]: 18,306 entries and 438 pages, close quote.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So I have to put this quote in perspective, the HSN nomenclature is basically a nomenclature
[Guest]: that has been used for a very long time in India, both for, you know, all sorts of custom
[Guest]: duties and tariffs.
[Guest]: And remember, every state was levying its own taxes, right?
[Guest]: So it's not like you didn't need a nomenclature before.
[Guest]: So we've always had one, it used to be a six digit nomenclature for a very long time.
[Guest]: Now it's an eight digit one.
[Guest]: So the complexity and the subcategory problems have increased.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And some of this is introduced by the fact that, you know, earlier, you had kind of learned
[Guest]: or figured out the state tax system.
[Guest]: And now most businessmen are learning a whole new tax system, which is never easy.
[Guest]: It's always hard.
[Guest]: I have moved countries and I can tell you how painful it is to figure out the tax system
[Guest]: in each new jurisdiction.
[Guest]: So there is a painful transition process.
[Guest]: And having said all of that, imagine if you are just a regular kirana store owner, right?
[Guest]: Who is selling, let's say, somewhere between 75 to 100 different types of products, right?
[Guest]: You're selling everything from safety pins and chewing gums, to Pepsi, to bread, to,
[Guest]: you know, your typical small kirana shop.
[Guest]: This person, in addition to running a kirana shop, which is not exactly easy anywhere in
[Guest]: India, has to figure out the correct rate for each of these things, and has to backwards
[Guest]: and forwards comply, and has to file taxes every month.
[Amit Varma]: And the inevitable consequence of this is that he becomes a hostage to the Inspector
[Guest]: Raj.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So either you're hostage to Inspector Raj, or you're hostage to the CA lawyer mafia,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Which the kirana guy probably can't afford.
[Guest]: So, I mean, there you go.
[Guest]: Which the kirana guy either can't afford, or you know, you get a cheaper version or
[Guest]: someone in the family helps you out, but basically, it's like hiring one more person full time
[Guest]: for a kirana shop guy, just to figure it out.
[Guest]: And you know, I mean, you live in Bombay, you've been to these kirana stores, right?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Let's assume the proprietor is well educated and understand the GST, has figured out, sat
[Guest]: with his chartered accountant and figured this out.
[Guest]: That young boy who works there, who's 18-19 years old, and is barely literate, he also
[Guest]: needs to know what is the correct tax to levy, right?
[Guest]: So now imagine next time a kirana shop owner wants to employ someone, he can't just employ
[Guest]: some unskilled fellow, right?
[Guest]: He needs to now have a higher level of education and skill to hand out, you know, Pepsi and
[Guest]: bread, because now there's a GST compliance issue.
[Guest]: And customers ask, I have, you know, eaten at restaurants, where my dad has actually
[Guest]: asked people, what is this GST rate, why are we being taxed at this rate?
[Guest]: What is this?
[Guest]: People ask when they get a receipt, and they can't understand it.
[Guest]: And they absolutely should.
[Guest]: And they should ask.
[Guest]: So this is something that people, I think, people do understand, because the average
[Guest]: person is navigating this problem every day, the average businessman is really getting
[Guest]: battered by this kind of information and compliance requirement.
[Guest]: But I think this idea is now only slowly penetrating to the governance system.
[Guest]: I think now, people who are administering the GST system, they have begun to understand
[Guest]: that this is a big problem.
[Guest]: Now, let me tell you a couple of smaller things, which seems small, but very important.
[Guest]: So you know, one example was this KitKat, a biscuit or is KitKat a chocolate, right?
[Guest]: Now, here is an example that actually went to the GST Council for clarification.
[Guest]: Now, there are, you know, most offices have some kind of a food canteen or cafeteria,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: If you run a canteen, it is taxed at 5%.
[Guest]: If you're using an outdoor caterer is 18%.
[Guest]: The problem is, almost all the offices have a canteen, but the catering is done by a third
[Guest]: party outside.
[Guest]: Very few offices actually cook their own meal in house, right?
[Guest]: So this question actually went up to the GST Council, should it be taxed at 5% or 18%?
[Guest]: Now, multiply this, right?
[Guest]: Multiply this across all the categories, all that the GST Council is doing is releasing
[Guest]: a new notification every day on what is the correct classification.
[Guest]: And now multiply this across, and you have a notification nightmare, right?
[Guest]: So this is ruled by notification.
[Guest]: Every day, some new bit of information has to come out, and everyone has to know where
[Guest]: to look for that information and then adjust and pay that particular rate.
[Guest]: So this has become a very big problem.
[Guest]: Now there's a third part.
[Guest]: Now let's say the GST Council says the correct rate is 5% not 18% or 18% not 5%.
[Guest]: If someone disagrees with the classification, you take it to court, right?
[Guest]: And 13% difference in tax rate can mean a lot of money for some firms.
[Guest]: So it's valuable for them to have a resolution to this question in the long run to save that
[Guest]: 13% in tax.
[Guest]: Now you take it to a tax tribunal or worse, to the High Court and Supreme Court, and you
[Guest]: basically burden the judicial system by adding a whole set of disputes, which shouldn't exist
[Guest]: in the first place, right?
[Guest]: And for these reasons, I think the best way to go is to have a single rate.
[Guest]: 40 countries have a single rate, they work pretty well.
[Guest]: About 28 additional countries have two rates, which also work pretty well.
[Guest]: So I think the first thing we need to do is, like I said, simple rules for a complex world,
[Guest]: just collapse all these different rates to one single GST rate, right?
[Guest]: And for very basic goods for poor people, you can just say it's a zero rate.
[Guest]: There is no GST levied on this.
[Guest]: Everyone else will have a single GST rate that needs to be paid.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's the best way to go forward.
[Amit Varma]: One GST rate to rule them all.
[Amit Varma]: On that note, we'll take a quick break.
[Amit Varma]: And when we come back, I want to raise a couple of the standard objections that people have
[Amit Varma]: to this one simple rate, and we'll continue the conversation.
[Amit Varma]: A quick break coming up.
[Unknown]: So it's been another great week at IBM podcast.
[Unknown]: And if you aren't following us on social media, please make sure you do we're IBM podcast
[Unknown]: on Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, all the major social media networks.
[Unknown]: This week on the Pragati podcast, Pawan and Hamsini talk to economist Anupam Manohar about
[Unknown]: how India is tackling creating new jobs.
[Unknown]: On the Puliyabazi show, tune into part two of Pranay's interview with China expert Manoj
[Unknown]: Kevalramani.
[Unknown]: On Simplified in a Shorty, Shriketh, Chuck and Naren give interesting tidbits about the
[Unknown]: qualifying round of the 2018 World Cup.
[Unknown]: On Cyrus Says This Week, Cyrus has a conversation with friend of the network Vivek Kaul about
[Unknown]: the economy.
[Unknown]: On Who's Your Mommy, Vedha and her friends discuss the strange and disturbing questions
[Unknown]: they've been asked by their kids.
[Unknown]: On Keeping It Queer, Naveen talks to non-binary Instagram sensation Diane Rubello.
[Unknown]: On Vartal Lab last week, Akash and Naveen exchanged some hilarious stories with Balraj
[Unknown]: Ghai, owner of the hotel Intercontinental and The Habitat.
[Unknown]: And with that, let me get you on to your shows.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I am talking with Shruti Rajgopalan and she's just finished making a case for why we need
[Amit Varma]: simple rules for complex problems and our GST is mindlessly complicated instead of being
[Amit Varma]: the good and simple tax that it was hyped up to be.
[Amit Varma]: And Shruti, before I continue, and I want to raise a couple of the standard objections
[Amit Varma]: people make to that, but before that, I just want to try and summarize your position and
[Amit Varma]: tell me if I missed anything.
[Amit Varma]: Your position basically is that the complexity of the GST, where you have so many different
[Amit Varma]: rates for so many different categories, has the impact that compliance costs go up.
[Amit Varma]: Compliance becomes extremely difficult and a lot of human labor of people in businesses
[Amit Varma]: and goes into figuring it out, or you hire CAs, which is a cost in itself.
[Amit Varma]: And what this can do at the margins is that it can drive some businesses out of business
[Amit Varma]: entirely, and in other cases, it will just raise the cost of those businesses, therefore
[Amit Varma]: raising the cost for consumers as well, and therefore ending in what seems to be like
[Amit Varma]: a vicious circle or a negative sum game or whichever way you put it.
[Amit Varma]: And to stop this negative ripple effect, where everybody suffers except for chartered accountants
[Amit Varma]: and lawyers, what you propose is that make it a good and simple tax, have one tax rate
[Amit Varma]: for everything, perhaps for certain goods have no tax rate at all, which are essential
[Amit Varma]: items for poor people, but otherwise just have one tax rate.
[Amit Varma]: Have I summed it up correctly?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And I just want to add one slightly broader point than the GST.
[Guest]: We talked a lot about classification, right?
[Guest]: There are two ways to solve the classification nightmare.
[Guest]: One is that the government just needs to classify things better, announce it better, and have
[Guest]: some mechanism by which people get this information quickly.
[Guest]: So the compliance costs are reduced.
[Guest]: That is one way of thinking.
[Guest]: And there is a lot of focus on trying to make the government more efficient at it.
[Guest]: The other way of thinking is the way you and I have been talking about, which is, let's
[Guest]: eliminate the need for a complex classification system in the first place, right?
[Guest]: So if you collapse it to a single rate, everyone needs to pay the same rate, there is no need
[Guest]: for classification, you kill the complexity automatically, right?
[Amit Varma]: So now the two sort of objections I want to raise are, to be clear, not my objections,
[Amit Varma]: I'm entirely on board with you, but these are objections that came up on Twitter, after
[Amit Varma]: your excellent piece kind of went viral in a small way.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to give you a chance to address these points that were made.
[Amit Varma]: One point is that having multiple rates of GST is really not fair or progressive simply
[Amit Varma]: because to have the same rate for a small kirana store for small goods is not as you
[Amit Varma]: would for say, a guy who's buying a BMW is not fair.
[Amit Varma]: Why shouldn't the guy buying the BMW pay more?
[Guest]: Well, so there are two parts to any kind of tax burden.
[Guest]: One is actually the tax rate that is levied on the good, right, which is the 5% that you
[Guest]: have for certain goods in a kirana store versus 28% for luxury items and things like that.
[Guest]: The second part of the tax burden is the compliance.
[Guest]: And if you really think about it, the kirana store guy has a greater compliance burden
[Guest]: when there are lots of classifications versus the guy who's buying the BMW.
[Guest]: Because he can probably afford a lawyer and a charted accountant, he probably has a few,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Same with this BMW showroom, they probably have an army of people helping them manage
[Guest]: the regulatory and the compliance requirements, whereas the small kirana store guy now has
[Guest]: this additional burden, right?
[Guest]: So what people are missing when they talk about progressive tax rates or a fair tax
[Guest]: rate for people who are using, you know, people of a certain income class who are selling
[Guest]: or consuming certain products versus people consuming luxury products is the classification
[Guest]: system imposes an enormous compliance burden, which by the way, doesn't fall equally on
[Guest]: everyone, it falls at a much greater proportion to the turnover on the little guy, right?
[Amit Varma]: So the point I'm making is, it's actually the other way around, it's a little guy who
[Amit Varma]: would benefit from a simple tax.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So if you ask people, I mean, there are two demands being made, one that the tax rates
[Guest]: are too high.
[Guest]: And the second that it's too complex, virtually everyone is on board with simplifying the
[Guest]: tax system, including the little guy, then you can talk about, you know, when you have
[Guest]: a single rate, I think it's very important to have a debate about what that single rate
[Guest]: should be.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And I think the lower the better.
[Guest]: So Singapore has a 7% GST, Australia has a 10% GST, we have some of the highest GST rates
[Guest]: in the world.
[Guest]: So ours need not be seven or 10%, right, we need, we need revenues to come in.
[Guest]: So there is an argument to be made there that maybe that single rate can be a little bit
[Guest]: higher, it's not in single digits, maybe it's in the low to mid teens.
[Guest]: But this, this argument that you know, the kirana guy is being treated unfairly because
[Guest]: by collapsing to a single rate, my answer is just the kirana guy is being treated unfairly
[Guest]: when you have multiplication of classification and complexity in rates also.
[Guest]: So I don't think you're helping that.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the compliance costs are hitting the poor, the much more and therefore you want
[Amit Varma]: to reduce the compliance costs and what the single rate should be is not an argument you're
[Amit Varma]: making right now.
[Amit Varma]: You're just saying that there should be a single rate.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So, you know, there are many ways to figure out what that single rate should be depending
[Guest]: on the end goal.
[Guest]: You know, you can have good projections for what that single rate will get you in terms
[Guest]: of revenue.
[Guest]: So think about this, if people stop spending money on chartered accountants and lawyers
[Guest]: and approaching the GST council and tax tribunals, right, that money can either go towards business
[Guest]: or it can go towards the higher tax rate.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: A penny saved is a penny earned.
[Guest]: So if you save money on compliance, you can raise it either as revenue or it can go back
[Guest]: in the economy through productive businesses.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And the government therefore makes the same amount of money, if not more, either by the
[Amit Varma]: money saved on compliance coming back as higher taxes or preferably going back into the economy
[Amit Varma]: and just increasing the tax base and there being more business to begin with.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And I think there is a very important argument to be made that I didn't make this argument
[Guest]: in the column, but right now a number of items are excluded from GST.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: The most important being real estate and alcohol.
[Guest]: So I think it's very, very important to broaden the GST base and include all goods and services.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: That is going to result in a much higher, much better tax collection, as well as a much
[Guest]: simpler and fairer tax system across the board for everyone, minimizing all this kind of
[Guest]: regulatory arbitrage that people engage in when it comes to real estate and things like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: And I think a better argument to make when it comes to raising revenue and being fair,
[Guest]: you know, to the poorer groups in the economy is that you need to expand the tax base, not
[Guest]: necessarily have multiple tax systems.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Let's, let's move on now to the second objection, which is the objection of revenue neutrality,
[Amit Varma]: which basically, let me try to first sum up what the objection is, and you can tell me
[Amit Varma]: if I've summed it up correctly, and then you can continue addressing it.
[Amit Varma]: Revenue neutrality basically means is that look, we move from one system to another system
[Amit Varma]: from hazard different taxes across states and so on to one GST with all these rates
[Amit Varma]: and exemptions, which applies to the whole country.
[Amit Varma]: And at one level, revenue neutrality states that you achieve revenue neutrality when you
[Amit Varma]: get in as much money in this new system, that is the government takes in as much money in
[Amit Varma]: this new system as they were getting before GST.
[Amit Varma]: And at another level, when you talk of revenue neutrality, it is a guarantee given by governments
[Amit Varma]: to states that the amount of revenue you guys make under GST that goes to you will be the
[Amit Varma]: same as you were making before GST, which is a guarantee they had to give to get the
[Amit Varma]: states to agree to GST in the first place.
[Amit Varma]: And the objection that therefore people are raising is that if you have just one rate
[Amit Varma]: for everything, instead of these different rates, won't that affect revenue neutrality?
[Guest]: Have I summed that up correctly?
[Guest]: Absolutely, I couldn't have said it better.
[Guest]: So Amit, you're absolutely right, there is a huge question of revenue neutrality.
[Guest]: This has been something that's been looming large at the macro level since the inception
[Guest]: of GST, right?
[Guest]: Like until you implement a new tax system, you don't know how much revenue it's going
[Guest]: to generate.
[Guest]: And there was a really big fear that the already depleting coffers of many of the Indian states
[Guest]: will deplete further because they agreed to this unified tax system.
[Guest]: Now there is some good news on that end, right?
[Guest]: So Arvind Subramaniam, our current economic advisor, our current outgoing economic advisor,
[Guest]: just recently wrote a piece based on nine months of revenue collections.
[Guest]: So until April this year, right?
[Guest]: On how in the first nine months, some months you've had, you know, a decrease in revenue
[Guest]: collections versus the same time last year, some months there has been an increase.
[Guest]: But overall for the nine months, there has actually been an increase in revenue collections,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So this is something that is quite remarkable and something unexpected.
[Guest]: So there is actually a revenue growth of 11.9% compared to the pre-GST numbers.
[Guest]: And this basically means he's made a great argument that there is a tax buoyancy of 1.2.
[Guest]: So tax buoyancy is the responsiveness of tax growth to nominal GDP growth.
[Guest]: So as the GDP grows, how much does your tax revenue grow?
[Guest]: So that number is called tax buoyancy, that's 1.2%.
[Guest]: So the chief economic advisor has actually given us some good news.
[Guest]: Like we can really breathe a little more comfortably now that we are not just revenue neutral in
[Guest]: the first nine months, actually revenue plus.
[Guest]: So that's one aspect, right?
[Guest]: So in that sense, the GST has been a success in that, you know, our revenue collection
[Guest]: system didn't just completely collapse when we shifted from system one to system two.
[Guest]: The second part of revenue collection is most of the states are not doing as badly.
[Guest]: The ones that were expected to do badly are not doing as badly in revenue collection as
[Guest]: was originally anticipated.
[Guest]: So Arvind Subramaniam says that the payout that the central government will have to make
[Guest]: to the states is much smaller than what was feared or anticipated before.
[Guest]: So in one sense, even the current extremely complex system we have seen is revenue neutral.
[Guest]: Now coming to the original question that you asked, revenue neutrality is not determined
[Guest]: by how many different rates you have.
[Guest]: It is determined by what is the revenue collection.
[Guest]: So you can have revenue neutral, revenue plus or revenue minus, depending on what the rate
[Guest]: is.
[Guest]: So let's say the single tax rate is 2%, right, and it's levied on everything.
[Guest]: It's possible that at such a low tax rate, you are not revenue neutral, you're revenue
[Guest]: minus, right?
[Guest]: But let's say the single tax rate is 18%.
[Guest]: It is wholly possible that even under that single rate, you are revenue plus as opposed
[Guest]: to being revenue neutral.
[Guest]: So the idea of revenue neutrality is the total of how much revenue you collect.
[Guest]: Now that is obviously determined by your tax rate, right?
[Guest]: There is something in economics, there's a Laffer curve, right, as tax rates increase,
[Guest]: first the revenue collection goes up, then it goes down.
[Guest]: So you want to figure out where India is on this curve.
[Guest]: With some goods, you're going to win some, with some goods, you're going to lose some.
[Guest]: So you know, there are some goods like say tobacco, which are highly non-responsive to
[Guest]: increases in tax, right?
[Guest]: So in those cases, a high tax rate will actually get you more revenue.
[Guest]: Some things like onions, you're going to lose if you impose a very high rate on it, the
[Guest]: revenue is actually going to go down.
[Guest]: So you're going to win some, you're going to lose some with a single tax rate.
[Guest]: But on the whole, it is wholly possible that if you have one single rate, and you find
[Guest]: the correct rate, you are not just revenue neutral, but you are revenue plus.
[Amit Varma]: So to sum it up, your point is that as far as revenue neutrality is concerned, it won't
[Amit Varma]: be affected necessarily by merely simplifying the GST and having one tax.
[Amit Varma]: What will affect is what that one tax is.
[Amit Varma]: And that is a separate argument that you're not getting into now.
[Amit Varma]: You're not saying whether one tax should be 18 or two, you're just saying we should have
[Amit Varma]: one tax and remove those compliance costs.
[Amit Varma]: And then let us talk about what that one number should be.
[Amit Varma]: And we can fix it at something that gives us confidence that revenue neutrality at least
[Guest]: will be achieved.
[Guest]: And you know, if you think about it, you know, all of us can appreciate that the government
[Guest]: is trying to do something quite extraordinary in terms of scale, right?
[Guest]: So there's going to be some trial and error in the system.
[Guest]: I think we all can agree to that.
[Guest]: So it is possible that you start with the rate and like Goldilocks, you need to move
[Guest]: higher or lower.
[Guest]: And that's okay.
[Guest]: I don't think that's a very big problem.
[Guest]: But remember, that is going to be a trial and error with only one rate, which minimizes
[Guest]: confusion.
[Guest]: You know, you open the first page of the newspaper, it says GST Council has increased the rate
[Guest]: or decreased the rate.
[Amit Varma]: And that's all you need to know.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So that trial and error process, if we concede that that's going to happen, it'll be simpler.
[Guest]: The other part of it is, a lot of the revenue neutrality arguments are also dependent on
[Guest]: the tax base.
[Guest]: And we don't see enough writing on that in the current GST framework, that we actually
[Guest]: need to expand the base, we need to cover everything, we need to stop exempting things
[Guest]: like gold and gemstones at ridiculously low rates, right?
[Guest]: Gold is taxed at 3%, gemstones, diamonds are taxed at 0.25%.
[Guest]: So we're making, you know, all this crazy exemptions.
[Guest]: So there's a really important question of eliminating all these exemptions and increasing
[Guest]: the tax base to things like alcohol and property taxes, and then simplifying down to one tax
[Guest]: rate.
[Guest]: And I don't think there is a very big problem of revenue neutrality.
[Guest]: I think long run, India will generate more revenue under a system like that.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, just to go back to public choice, which we mentioned at the start of this episode,
[Amit Varma]: what typically happens when you have so many exemptions and so much discretion to people
[Amit Varma]: in authority is that you will have all these interest groups coming up and there is scope
[Amit Varma]: for corruption, which is almost inevitable, I would say.
[Amit Varma]: And you will have your gemstone lobby and your alcohol lobby and all these different
[Amit Varma]: lobbyings.
[Amit Varma]: And then it just becomes that same old interplay between power and money.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I think you and I could come up with very good ideas on why we have so many exemptions,
[Guest]: knowing all the public choice literature that we know.
[Guest]: I think another question is, how do we persuade all these different groups to come under one
[Guest]: umbrella?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And I think we are very well poised in this moment, you know, normally for someone like
[Guest]: you and me, who are strong believers in federalism, it's quite frightening to have single party
[Guest]: rule in so many states, right?
[Guest]: Just from a point of view of concentration of power, it doesn't matter which party it
[Amit Varma]: is.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Especially given that we have a fairly weak constitution in some ways.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And so right now, we are in a very interesting moment, which has happened, you know, after
[Guest]: the great Nehruvian times, which is 21 states are under one party rule.
[Guest]: So there is some case to be made that if there is anyone who can unify all these different
[Guest]: interests and bring them under one umbrella and persuade them, it is the current ruling
[Guest]: party and the current Prime Minister.
[Guest]: I don't think that would be an unfair thing to say.
[Guest]: So we are in a good, I mean, there are many bad things that come from concentration of
[Guest]: power.
[Guest]: But it also provides an opportunity to overcome all this kind of interest group activity and
[Guest]: capture.
[Guest]: So I would really, I would hope that the current government capitalizes on that moment and
[Guest]: actually does that for the GST.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm actually for the rest of this episode, I'm going to ask you only questions related
[Amit Varma]: to public choice theory, because I want to explore the sort of political economy of why
[Amit Varma]: the GST is what it is and how it can be reformed.
[Amit Varma]: What are the sort of incentives in play which could prompt people in power to make that
[Amit Varma]: move towards a single tax rate?
[Amit Varma]: And what are the kind of incentives in play which could make those in power resist such
[Guest]: a move?
[Guest]: So I'll give you a couple of examples right now, I think there is a very unified lobby,
[Guest]: you know, even if we break down the different goods and services in the economy to different
[Guest]: lobbies, I think they're all asking for exemptions and special privileges and things like that.
[Guest]: But I think there is a lot of unity in that everyone wants this to be a simpler system.
[Amit Varma]: No question.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: Because once everybody can benefit, like normally what happens is that the benefits are concentrated
[Guest]: and the costs are dispersed.
[Guest]: So in terms of compliance and complexity, I think there is a lot of unity virtually
[Guest]: every industry lobby that has been coming to both the GST Council and the government
[Guest]: have been persuading the government to create a simpler system.
[Guest]: And both Mr. Jaitley, and you know, the current economic advisor, Mr. Subramanian, they have
[Guest]: all talked about how there is going to be some discussion and move towards simplifying
[Guest]: the current GST tax rate system, right, so collapse it down to fewer rates, eliminate
[Guest]: some of the exemptions.
[Guest]: So I think this is very much on everyone's mind, because all the industry lobbies have
[Guest]: been talking about this.
[Guest]: What could mitigate that?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So what can mitigate that is some lobbies actually become strong, like we've seen a
[Guest]: very strong Gujarat lobby that has ended up with ridiculously low rates for gold and gemstones,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Somebody says, okay, don't give us a simple rate, just give us a special rate.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: It's going to be too difficult to unify everyone and bring it under one tax rate and compliance
[Guest]: umbrella.
[Guest]: Hume thoda special treatment de do, hum aapke khas hain.
[Guest]: That is sort of the attitude.
[Guest]: And we have seen that happening.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Basically, industries which don't have much power or much lobbying capacity at the state
[Guest]: and federal level, especially entertainment, right, different states put all kinds of stresses
[Guest]: on entertainment.
[Guest]: It's very difficult for them to lobby or like spend money on lobbying instead of spending
[Guest]: money on making movies or making music.
[Guest]: On the other hand, tobacco, alcohol, you know, some of these lobbies are just very well organized.
[Guest]: So they will be very good at getting their special rates, right?
[Guest]: And to neutralize the effect of the special rates, some goods which are used by everyone,
[Guest]: which are not well organized, are going to have this cess and that cess in addition to
[Guest]: the highest 28% GST.
[Guest]: So this is, this is a problem of special interests, and in the short run, special interest trying
[Guest]: to capture whatever gains there are, when there is a lot of confusion and transition
[Guest]: in a new tax system.
[Amit Varma]: And what is your sense of which side is stronger?
[Amit Varma]: You know, is it likely that we will simplify to the extent you want or because typically
[Amit Varma]: what happens in government is that regulation only gets deeper and more complex because
[Amit Varma]: of all the interest groups and the incentives involved, it rarely gets simpler.
[Guest]: But you know, there is a huge incentive in this case, right?
[Guest]: If things get more complex, and we go back to our good old system of Parchi, you know,
[Guest]: there is a bit so you can't put India doesn't have the state capacity to throw everyone
[Guest]: in jail if they evade tax, right?
[Guest]: If you have a highly complex system and very high tax rates, what's going to happen, people
[Guest]: will just stop paying.
[Guest]: Then it's more beneficial.
[Guest]: You know, I recently last time I was in India, I went with my mom to our tailor.
[Guest]: She has two sets of books.
[Guest]: One is GST compliant.
[Guest]: The other one is all Parchi, start to finish Parchi.
[Guest]: So all her inputs, people give a Parchi and then she gives us a Parchi, right?
[Guest]: So what is going to happen is if the compliance requirements are too high, or if the tax rates
[Guest]: are too high, people will just start evading and when people evade tax, no matter how beautiful
[Guest]: your GST system is, the government doesn't have revenue.
[Guest]: So I think one major fear for the current government and any future government is we
[Guest]: can't mess up the system so much that there is a genuine loss in revenue.
[Guest]: I think there is some push towards simplifying the system to increase revenue.
[Guest]: And remember, the more revenue you have, the greater power you have as a ruling party.
[Amit Varma]: So out of sheer self interest, the evil force will be prompted to do a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: Or not do a terribly bad thing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I was I was being tongue in cheek there.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm going to twist your words out of context, because it gives me pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: What Shruti has just called for is civil disobedience on a mass scale.
[Amit Varma]: Don't pay your taxes until the GST gets reformed.
[Amit Varma]: I won't even ask you if that's a fair summary or not, because it obviously is.
[Guest]: And on that happy note, Shruti, thanks so much.
[Guest]: I think, no, it's not a fair summary, but I will say I think all forms of protest are
[Amit Varma]: legitimate.
[Guest]: I was kidding.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: No, but I think people can protest by saying we refuse to file, do what it is you wish,
[Guest]: because your system's really terrible.
[Guest]: We have fantastic history in India of objecting to unfair taxes, starting with the salt tax.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: That is a civil disobedience movement.
[Guest]: So I can very much get behind kirana shops who say this is just too complicated.
[Guest]: You have got to simplify this.
[Guest]: Otherwise, by all means, you know, shut our shops and throw us in jail.
[Guest]: I think, in fact, I would in fact call for that.
[Amit Varma]: I would love if we could organize like that.
[Amit Varma]: What I keep reminding people is that the salt tax that Gandhi protested was a fraction of
[Amit Varma]: what the salt tax is today.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, where is our resistance to oppression?
[Amit Varma]: And on that note, Shruti, I mean, I learned a lot in this episode, and it's definitely
[Amit Varma]: taken us forward from the last two episodes, which I would nevertheless urge the listeners
[Amit Varma]: to check out as well.
[Amit Varma]: So thanks a lot for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thanks so much, Amit.
[Guest]: I had a really good time.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to scene unseen.in, which has
[Amit Varma]: all the archives of the scene and the unseen, including many episodes with Shruti.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Shruti on Twitter at srajgopalan.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: He bends down to test the warm water for his bath.
[Unknown]: He comes here to quench his thirst for a hot shower and some podcasts.
[Unknown]: You can witness how he enjoys having other people talk about cool stuff in his bathroom.
[Unknown]: Indeed, it helps him with his loneliness.
[Unknown]: You can find more of his species on ivmpodcast.com, your one-stop destination where you can check
[Unknown]: out the coolest Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: Happy listening!